the chess universe is a board of 64
black and white squares
when you sit down to play just make sure
to position the board
so that each player has a dark square in
their lower left corner
the columns that go up and down have
letters from a to h
and the horizontal rows are done in
numbers one to eight
that just makes it easier to record your
moves then later
you can look back to see if you made any
big mistakes
so there are 32 pieces in total 16 on
each side
if you're playing white you go first the
entire point of the game
is to force the opponent's king into a
trap he can't escape from
that's called checkmate yeah sounds
simple enough
but first you have to get to him at
something his loyal subjects don't want
you to do
they'll be working on protecting their
king and going after yours
all while trying to capture as many of
your pieces as possible
[Music]
capture means the other person's chess
piece lands on one of yours
if that happens your piece is out of the
game finished
tata bye bye so
take a seat opposite a friend and
prepare your mind
it's time to meet the team starting with
the pawns
the eight pawns are out in front so
you're probably going to lose some of
them early in the game
not all of them at once of course but
someone has to kick off the action
and challenge the other player to make
some daring moves
but don't just throw them away they can
be really useful at blocking off paths
and can even protect your king towards
the end of the game
oh and don't worry too much when you
start losing pieces
you'll be capturing plenty of your own
that's just how chess works
pawns are the only pieces that can't go
backward they can move
only one square forward or two squares
forward if it's their first move of the
game
still don't let them fool you these
sneaky little guys can capture even the
toughest pieces
if you play them right when a pawn
captures one of your friends pieces
it does it with a skillfully diagonal
move instead
of just going forward also if your pawn
makes it
all the way to the other side you get to
replace it with any piece you want
but getting there is not that easy two
rooks
stand in each corner these guys are
pretty chill
and can move around a bit more than
pawns they can go forwards backwards and
sideways but only if nothing's blocking
their way
rooks can't jump but if your friend
leaves a piece blocking their path
bam back in the day these guys look more
like chariots
you can see why right next to the rooks
are some horses or as they like to be
called
knights they move in an l-shaped pattern
in any direction
they want two jumps in one direction and
one jump in the other
they're the only ones who can jump over
other pieces yours or your friends
they can't land on a square if you've
already got a piece there
but if your friend leaves a piece
unguarded bam again
after the brave and bouncy nights come
the bishops
they stand on either side of the queen
and king
ready to do whatever it takes to protect
them
bishops move diagonally any direction
that's open
one moves around only on the black
squares the other
only on the white and now the piece
you've been waiting for
her majesty the queen the white queen
starts on a light square and the black
queen starts on a dark square
she's the most powerful piece on the
board with the combined powers of a rook
and a bishop but as always with great
power
comes everybody wanting a piece of you
she's right at the top of your friend's
most wanted list
if your friend captures a queen it'll be
way easier to go after the mighty king
then it's all over kings
can only move one square at a time like
a pawn
but they can move in any direction even
diagonally
he captures pieces too but it's way more
tricky
remember that checkmate thing from the
beginning when one of your friends
pieces gets into a position where they
could capture the king
is called check then you've only got a
couple of options
use one of your pieces to capture the
piece that's threatening your king
move your king out of harm's way or move
one of your pieces in front of your king
to protect him
once his majesty is in check and you
can't do any of those options
the game's over it's checkmate you can
push your king so he falls over
if you want to be extra dramatic one way
to avoid trouble early on in the game
is to do a move called castling if you
have some open space
between your rook and king you can make
them swap places
sort of you move your king two squares
in the rook's direction
and the rook shuffles right past him
it's the only time you can move two
pieces at once
castling can happen either to the left
or to the right
you can only do it if you haven't moved
those pieces yet
and as long as you don't pass through a
check from any of your friends pieces
stalemate is something that rarely
happens
but it's good to be prepared for it it
just means that you can't make any moves
with any of your pieces
your king can't move anywhere but he's
safe where he is
he isn't in check if that happens no one
wins
and it's kind of a letdown take a few
seconds and try to figure out
what that would look like another
situation where no one wins
is when a game ends in a tie
it usually happens when you and your
friend only have your kings left
and you're just chasing each other
endlessly around the board
it might be time to start a new game but
hey if you get to that point
you're probably not a beginner anymore
and now to answer the question
everyone's been waiting for what's this
queen's
gambit thing everybody's talking about
only one of the oldest opening moves in
the history of chess
it consists of three simple moves
so white pawn moves to d4 black pawn
moves to d5
and another white pawn moves to c4 your
queen
is now more vulnerable and you'll
probably lose the c4 pawn
but the upside you get control of the
center of the board
if you're more of an active player who
likes to take the initiative
go for it now take some time to practice
a couple of queens gambit variations
see what moves you could make if you
were playing white or black
the great thing about playing alone is
that you'll always win
awesome but also you'll lose every time
a good chess game has three main stages
the opening every player sends out their
scouts onto the board
trying to build a strategy and see what
kind of player they're up against
phase two begins when the players start
going after each other
capturing more and more powerful pieces
phase three is the final stage
crunch time there are way fewer pieces
on the board
usually less than half and the king
starts to move around
a lot more the goal isn't just to corner
the king into checkmate
you want to capture as many of the other
guys pieces as you can
so your path to the king is more open
the more mobile your pieces are
the more powerful they are but be
careful
good players love to leave traps for you
to fall right into
they might leave a piece all alone
somewhere when you capture it with your
queen
they just laugh and capture your queen
that's why chess is so popular and hard
you have to plan your path to success
but also try to predict the other guys
strategy
who what a brain workout so ready to
invite a friend for a game and show him
what you learned
cool